---
layout: post
title: 2017 wrap-up
description: A summary of my year, with lists of favourite media.
comments: true
---

At the end of every year, I like to reflect on some of the major things that have happened in my life, and make some lists of favourite things I've enjoyed.

## What happened in my life?

From January to April I finished my coursework in the Master of Data Science program at UBC. It was such a privilege to be part of the first cohort of this program. I had incredible teachers and a tight-knit group of smart, motivated classmates. I especially enjoyed my courses in machine learning and data visualization.

In May and June I worked on a capstone project with three of my classmates: we built a prototype of a dashboard to help edX instructors understand how students are engaging with course content. It was exciting to see how much we were able to accomplish in just two months of work.

In August I started my new job as a data scientist at the [Centre for Teaching, Learning, and Technology (CTLT)](https://ctlt.ubc.ca/) at UBC. In this first month, I mainly read proposals for pilot projects in learning analytics. I also learned a little bit of data visualization in D3.js. It was a fairly gentle start, since the real work wouldn't begin until the start of the school year.

In September I took a brief break from full-time work at the CTLT so I could teach [DSCI 542 Communication and Argumentation](https://ubc-mds.github.io/2017-11-10-DSCI-542-communication/) in the Master of Data Science program. It was an absolute joy – definitely the best teaching experience I've ever had. My students were engaged, my TAs were fantastic, and I was given lots of freedom to design the course however I liked. What a privilege.

From October to December I've been working full-time at the CTLT. My time is split half-and-half between two broad types of activities. One is development and analysis: I work with software and data to automate tasks and answer questions related to teaching and learning. The other is research and engagement: I work with people, usually faculty members or department heads, to understand needs and literacies around data and analytics. The work has been at times quite challenging, mainly because I have so many projects on the go at the same time. But I'm learning a lot, and I'm excited to get back to work in the new year.

## Books

I didn't read as many books this year as usual. I would say that there were only two books I really loved, which I would confidently recommend to any curious friend:

* [*Algorithms to Live By*](https://www.amazon.ca/Algorithms-Live-Computer-Science-Decisions/dp/1627790365), by Brian Christian and Tom Griffiths
	* It's rare that I read a book that touches on so many foundational concepts in an academic discipline (in this case, computer science) and also relates to so much of daily life. I finished this book in early October, and I've thought about it almost every week since.
* [*The Happiness Hypothesis*](https://www.amazon.ca/Happiness-Hypothesis-Finding-Modern-Ancient/dp/0465028020/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1514328713&sr=1-1&keywords=the+happiness+hypothesis), by Jonathan Haidt
	* *The Happiness Hypothesis* is to psychology as *Algorithms to Live By* is to computer science. Haidt is an incredible writer, and I've thought about ideas in this book many times since I finished it.

There were several others that I liked quite a bit, but which I would recommend more tentatively. Alphabetically by author:

* *How to Fail at Everything and Still Win Big*, by Scott Adams
* *Superintelligence*, by Nick Bostrom
* *Sapiens*, by Yuval Noah Harrari
* *Homo Deus*, by Yuval Noah Harrari
* *The Nurture Assumption*, by Judith Rich Harris
* *Chaos*, by James Gleick
* *Never Let Me Go*, by Kazuo Ishiguro
* *Houston, We Have a Narrative*, by Randy Olson
* *Everybody Lies*, by Seth Stevens-Davidowitz
* *Inadequate Equilibria*, by Eliezer Yudkowsky

I don't often reread books, but this year I reread two. That fact alone should recommend them:

* [*Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality*](http://www.hpmor.com/), by Eliezer Yudkowsky
* [*The Sense of Style*](https://www.amazon.ca/Sense-Style-Thinking-Persons-Writing/dp/0670025852/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1514328774&sr=1-1&keywords=the+sense+of+style), by Steven Pinker

I also read [*An Introduction to Statistical Learning*](http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~gareth/ISL/) from start to finish, which felt like quite an accomplishment. I think this was the first time I've ever read an entire textbook. For anyone who aspires to do this sort of thing, I highly recommend forming a reading group with two to three others. Two of my friends and I read a chapter or two each week, and met for a few hours to talk through the practice problems.

## Music

Where to begin! I listened to so much new music this year that I'm going to break this down by genre. Albums are listed in no particular order.

### Albums

#### Hip Hip / Rap

##### Loved

* Saturation, Saturation II, and Saturation III, by BROCKHAMPTON
* Big Fish Theory, by Vince Staples
* SYRE, by Jaden Smith
* Back in Business, by Lack of Afro

##### Liked

* 4:44, by Jay-Z
* DAMN, by Kendrick Lamar
* The Darkest Hour, by Madchild
* Flower Boy, by Tyler, The Creator

#### Rock/Alternative

##### Loved

* american dream, by LCD Soundsystem
* The Search For Everything, by John Mayer
* Little Fictions, by Elbow
* Life Will See You Now, by Jens Lekman
* Mother Lion, by May Erlewine
* After Laughter, by Paramore
* Heartbreak Hits, by Theo Katzman

##### Liked

* Semper Femina, by Laura Marling
* Something To Tell You, by HAIM
* From the Outside, by Hey Violet
* Nervous Systems, by Julia Michaels
* Dont Smile At Me, by Billie Eilish
* Thanks for Listening, by Chris Thile
* All the Light Above it Too, by Jack Johnson
* Peace & Information, by Jenny O.
* Notos, by The Oh Hellos
* Planetarium, by Sufjan Stevens, Bryce Dessner, Nico Muhly, and James McAlister
* I like it when you sleep, for you are so beautiful yet so unaware of it, by The 1975

#### Funk / R&B / Jazz

##### Loved

* Funk Wav Bounces Vol. 1, by Calvin Harris
* Mr Finish Line, by Vulfpeck
* Freudian, by Daniel Caesar
* Voyager, by Moonchild
* Scary Pockets, by Scary Pockets

##### Liked

* Cory Wong and the Green Screen Band, by Cory Wong
* War & Leisure, by Miguel
* Ctrl, by SZA
* Sounds of Crenshaw, Vol. 1, by Terrace Martin Presents the Pollyseeds
* Drunk, by Thundercat

#### Electronic

##### Loved

* New Energy, by Four Tet
* Onism, by Photay

##### Liked

* Process, by Sampha

#### Pre-2017 favourites that I listened to obsessively this year

* Hard Candy, by Counting Crows
* The La's, by The La's

### Songs

Below are the 25 songs I listened to most in 2017. There's obviously a bias toward songs that were released earlier in the year, but there you go. You'll notice that there's also a bias toward songs from After Laughter, by Paramore, because I really really liked that album.

1. Hard Times, by Paramore
2. Want You Back, by HAIM
3. oh baby, by LCD Soundsystem
4. Attention, by Charlie Puth
5. Rose-Colored Boy, by Paramore
6. Go With It (feat. Chromeo), by Oliver
7. The Last Mall, by Steely Dan
8. Mr. Big Stuff, by Jean Knight
9. Caught In the Middle, by Paramore
10. Mr. Finish Line (feat. Christine Hucal & Theo Katzman), by Vulfpeck
11. Feels (feat. Pharrell Williams, Katy Perry & Big Sean)
12. Screens, by Photay
13. HEAT, by BROCKHAMPTON
14. GUMMY, by BROCKHAMPTON
15. Nikes, by Frank Ocean
16. other voices, by LCD Soundsystem
17. Forgiveness, by Paramore
18. Heart Don't Stand a Chance, by Anderson .Paak
19. Told You So, by Paramore
20. Get You (feat. Kali Uchis), by Daniel Caesar
21. Son of a Gun, by The La's
22. Back in Business (feat. Wax & Herbal T), by Lack of Afro
23. Voyager (Intro), by Moonchild
24. Fake Happy, by Paramore
25. Things I Miss the Most, by Steely Dan

## TV and Movies

I didn't watch too many new movies or shows this year, so if your favourite isn't included here, it's more likely that I didn't see it than that I saw it but didn't like it.

### Movies

#### Loved

* Get Out
* Logan
* Star Wars: The Last Jedi

#### Liked

* Blade Runner 2049
* Dunkirk

### TV Shows

#### Loved

* Stranger Things

#### Liked

* Atlanta
* Black Mirror
* The Crown
